.TH RSVP 1 "2026-06-23" "rsvp 0.3.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
rsvp \(en terminal speed reader with Rapid Serial Visual Presentation (RSVP) and an in-TUI command palette.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBrsvp\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fIcommand\fR] [\fIargs\fR]
Launches the TUI when no subcommand is given.
.SH DESCRIPTION
RSVP is a terminal user interface (TUI) for reading text files at 300\-1000 words per minute using the RSVP method: a single word is shown at a time, centered on its Optimal Recognition Point (ORP). The Python frontend (Textual) is backed by a Rust core (\fIrsvp\-core\fR) that handles tokenization, ORP calculation, and file parsing.
Supported file types: Markdown, plain text, EPUB, and PDF.
Project management is exposed as a set of \fBuv run\fR tasks; see the \fBTASKS\fR section below.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
\fBread <file>\fR
Read a book by file path (imports on first run). Options: \fB\-\-wpm\fR N, \fB\-\-word\fR N, \fB\-\-focus\fR.
.TP
\fBimport <file>\fR
Import a book into the library. Prints ID, word count, and chapter count.
.TP
\fBlibrary\fR
Browse the library. With no flags, opens the library screen. \fB\-\-list\fR / \fB\-\-search\fR \fItext\fR print to stdout.
.TP
\fBremove <book_id>\fR
Delete a book from the library (prompts to confirm).
.TP
\fBstats <book_id>\fR
Show verbose reading statistics for a book.
.TP
\fBconfig\fR
Open the live settings UI with debounced auto\-save.
.TP
\fBdoctor\fR
Print a JSON diagnostic report. Exit 0 if healthy.
.TP
\fBthemes\fR
List the available themes (current theme is starred).
.TP
\fBwhere\fR
Print the data directory paths (config, DB, notes).
.TP
\fBversion\fR
Print version, Python, platform, schema, and rust core status.
.SS Aliases
Short forms resolve to the canonical subcommand: \fBr\fR=\fBread\fR, \fBopen\fR=\fBread\fR, \fBi\fR/\fBadd\fR=\fBimport\fR, \fBls\fR/\fBlist\fR=\fBlibrary\fR, \fBrm\fR=\fBremove\fR, \fBinfo\fR=\fBstats\fR, \fBcfg\fR=\fBconfig\fR, \fBdiagnose\fR=\fBdoctor\fR.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\fB\-\-version\fR\fR
Print the version of rsvp and exit.
.TP
\fB\fB\-\-help\fR\fR
Print the grouped help (Reading, Library, Configuration, Diagnostics, App).
.SH TASKS
Project management lives in the workspace \fBpyproject.toml\fR and is run via \fBuv run <task>\fR. Each task is a real Python entry point in \fIscripts/\fR; run \fBuv run tasks\fR for the live table.
.TP
\fB\fBuv run tui\fR\fR
Launch the interactive TUI (default).
.TP
\fB\fBuv run read\fR\fR
Forward to \fBrsvp read\fR.
.TP
\fB\fBuv run import\fR\fR
Forward to \fBrsvp import\fR.
.TP
\fB\fBuv run library\fR\fR
Forward to \fBrsvp library\fR.
.TP
\fB\fBuv run config\fR\fR
Forward to \fBrsvp config\fR.
.TP
\fB\fBuv run doctor\fR\fR
Forward to \fBrsvp doctor\fR with workspace extras.
.TP
\fB\fBuv run themes\fR\fR
Forward to \fBrsvp themes\fR.
.TP
\fB\fBuv run where\fR\fR
Forward to \fBrsvp where\fR.
.TP
\fB\fBuv run version\fR\fR
Forward to \fBrsvp version\fR.
.TP
\fB\fBuv run palette\fR\fR
Open the in\-TUI command palette directly.
.TP
\fB\fBuv run demo\fR\fR
Run the dependency\-free \fIdemo_tui.py\fR.
.TP
\fB\fBuv run build\fR\fR
Build the Rust extension and install the Python package.
.TP
\fB\fBuv run dev\fR\fR
Editable install (\fBmaturin develop \-\-release\fR).
.TP
\fB\fBuv run sync\fR\fR
\fBuv sync\fR (use \fB\-\-rebuild\fR to rebuild Rust).
.TP
\fB\fBuv run clean\fR\fR
Remove build/, dist/, eggs, bytecode, caches. \fB\-\-all\fR also wipes \fI.venv/\fR and \fIuv.lock\fR.
.TP
\fB\fBuv run test\fR\fR
Run the pytest suite (extras forwarded).
.TP
\fB\fBuv run lint\fR\fR
\fBruff check\fR + \fBblack \-\-check\fR.
.TP
\fB\fBuv run format\fR\fR
\fBblack\fR + \fBruff check \-\-fix\fR.
.TP
\fB\fBuv run typecheck\fR\fR
\fBmypy \-\-strict\fR.
.TP
\fB\fBuv run verify\fR\fR
Full quality gate: \fBlint\fR + \fBtypecheck\fR + \fBtest\fR.
.TP
\fB\fBuv run docs\fR\fR
Build the man page and snapshot the CLI help.
.TP
\fB\fBuv run man\fR\fR
Render / view / install \fIrsvp.1\fR.
.TP
\fB\fBuv run bench\fR\fR
Run the \fIcargo bench\fR micro\-benchmarks.
.TP
\fB\fBuv run tasks\fR\fR
Print the live task table (this section, refreshed).
.SH IN\-TUI COMMAND PALETTE
Press \fBCtrl+P\fR inside the TUI to open the fuzzy command palette. The current command set is:
.TP
\fBnext_figure\fR
Next Figure
.TP
\fBprev_figure\fR
Previous Figure
.TP
\fBopen_picker\fR
Open Figure Picker
.TP
\fBtoggle_play\fR
Play / Pause
.TP
\fBjump_start\fR
Jump to Start
.TP
\fBjump_end\fR
Jump to End
.TP
\fBincrease_speed\fR
Increase WPM (+25)
.TP
\fBdecrease_speed\fR
Decrease WPM (-25)
.TP
\fBwpm_300\fR
Set WPM = 300
.TP
\fBwpm_400\fR
Set WPM = 400
.TP
\fBwpm_500\fR
Set WPM = 500
.TP
\fBwpm_600\fR
Set WPM = 600
.TP
\fBtheme_dark\fR
Theme: Dark
.TP
\fBtheme_light\fR
Theme: Light
.TP
\fBtheme_solarized\fR
Theme: Solarized
.TP
\fBtoggle_focus\fR
Toggle Focus Mode
.TP
\fBadd_note\fR
Add Note at Position
.TP
\fBshow_help\fR
Show Help
Type to filter; \fBEnter\fR picks the top match; \fBEsc\fR dismisses.
.SH KEYBINDINGS
Defaults; override per\-user via \fBConfig.keybindings\fR.
.TP
\fBquit                \fR \fIq             \fR
Quit
.TP
\fBshow library        \fR \fIl             \fR
Open library
.TP
\fBshow settings       \fR \fIs             \fR
Open settings
.TP
\fBshow help           \fR \fIquestion_mark \fR
Show help
.TP
\fBcommand palette     \fR \fIctrl+p        \fR
Command palette
.TP
\fBtoggle play         \fR \fIspace         \fR
Play / pause
.TP
\fBprev word           \fR \fIleft          \fR
Previous word
.TP
\fBnext word           \fR \fIright         \fR
Next word
.TP
\fBincrease speed      \fR \fIup            \fR
Faster
.TP
\fBdecrease speed      \fR \fIdown          \fR
Slower
.TP
\fBjump start          \fR \fIhome          \fR
Jump to start
.TP
\fBjump end            \fR \fIend           \fR
Jump to end
.TP
\fBtoggle focus        \fR \fIf             \fR
Focus mode
.TP
\fBtoggle panel        \fR \fItab           \fR
Toggle side panel
.TP
\fBnext figure         \fR \fIn             \fR
Next figure
.TP
\fBprev figure         \fR \fIshift+n       \fR
Previous figure
.TP
\fBfigure picker       \fR \fIctrl+g        \fR
Figure picker
.TP
\fBadd note            \fR \fIctrl+n        \fR
Add note at current position
.SH FILES
Default location is \fI$RSVP_HOME\fR or \fI~/.rsvp/\fR:
\(bu \fIconfig.json\fR \(en user configuration (theme, wpm, keybindings).
\(bu \fIlibrary.db\fR \(en SQLite store of books, chapters, and notes.
\(bu \fInotes/\fR \(en on\-disk note storage.
\(bu \fIcache/\fR \(en per\-book parsed\-text cache.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
\fB\fBRSVP_HOME\fR\fR
Override the data directory (default \fI~/.rsvp\fR).
.TP
\fB\fBRSVP_NEW_UI\fR\fR
Force\-enable the new SettingsScreen (set to \fB1\fR).
.TP
\fB\fBNO_COLOR\fR\fR
Disable ANSI colour in the helper scripts.
.TP
\fB\fBPYTHONIOENCODING\fR\fR
Set to \fButf\-8\fR when reading non\-ASCII books.
.SH EXAMPLES
Launch the TUI at the library view:
    rsvp
Read a book at 450 WPM in focus mode:
    rsvp read ~/books/sapiens.epub \-\-wpm 450 \-\-focus
Import a Markdown file and read it:
    rsvp i ./essay.md && rsvp r ./essay.md
Re\-build the Rust extension in dev mode:
    uv run dev
Run the full quality gate:
    uv run verify
Render and install the man page:
    uv run man \-\-install
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
If a book fails to import, the database is missing, or a keybinding fails to resolve, run \fBuv run doctor\fR \(en the JSON report names the offending file. Exits 0 only on a healthy install.
Exit codes: \fB0\fR success, \fB1\fR generic error, \fB130\fR interrupted (Ctrl\-C).
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBproject.json\fR (5), \fBuv\fR (1), \fBman\fR (1).
Online docs: \fIhttps://example.com/rsvp\fR (placeholder).
